As we think about
comprehension and response today, I’d like you to first
think about the essential comprehension strategies. And
for me this is an important starting place, because one
of the things, I think, that happens to us as teachers is
that we end up with this very large collection of
comprehension strategies. There are so many things
that we want children to do if we look at a scope and
sequence. There are often, you know, 20, 25 different
skills listed in a typical scope and sequence or
curriculum guide, or something of that sort. And in fact,
when you compare it to the behaviors of poor readers,
researchers have found essentially five behaviors that
differentiate good readers from poor readers. And they
are these: Good readers focus attention and set purpose
in some way. You can think of this in terms of the
predicting strategies that are so common in our
classrooms.
The second strategy that differentiates good readers
from poor readers is the ability to organize information
during and after reading. I think about that as the
practice of sorting and categorizing, knowing what to
keep and what to throw away. Good readers don’t try to
remember everything they read. Good readers don’t
read a 20 or 25 page chapter and try to remember it all.
They have some way to prioritize information. They have
some way to decide, This is important, I’ll keep it. This is
trivial information, I’ll throw it away. They organize and
sort in some way.
Good readers also are able to elaborate on ideas and
clarify information. They may do this in response to
questions from someone else. So the teacher may ask a
question and the child can elaborate. Or there may be a
question in their book, or a question from another child.
Or there may be a self-initiated question: I wonder why
this happened? And the child can go back and sort it out
and elaborate.
Good readers can also summarize. Upon completion of
a chapter, they can tell you what it’s mostly about.
And good readers, throughout each of these processes,
throughout the reading of the text, can self-monitor and
self-correct. And if they find that they’re not building
comprehension, they can go back and fix up. Gee, I
don’t understand this because I never set a purpose for
reading. I’m not getting this because I don’t know why
I’m reading. I need to start again; I don’t understand this.
mostly about. I need to go back through, reread and
organize my thoughts in some way.
OK, so these are the essential comprehension strategies
we need to think about; we need to develop in our
readers. The ways to develop them relate to the type of
instruction we provide children. So, we can begin by
characterizing instruction as needing to be explicit. In
defining explicit instruction, we can most easily define it
as having 3 important parts. An explicit lesson includes
teacher demonstration and modeling of some sort. It
includes guided practice, with the teacher and children
working together through the lesson. And then finally it
includes independent practice when the child, or the
group of children, have an opportunity to practice what
the teacher has taught. This is critical when the skill or
strategy is introductory.
An effective lesson also is marked by strategic
instruction. So, in addition to including demonstration,
guided practice, and independent practice in an effective
lesson, the teacher explains what to do: Today we’re
going to learn to prepare a summary. The teacher shows
children how to do it: These are the steps to
summarization. This is how you summarize. And the
teacher explains when to use the strategy and why the
strategy might be useful: So, for example, you might
choose to summarize when you need to remember
something over a long period of time. Summarization
helps you remember things over a longer period of time.
Summarization will help you to go back and access the
information later on. So, we're telling children what to do,
how to do it, when, and why to do it.
If you think back and reflect on your own practice, what
we know about teachers in general is that we’re pretty
consistent about telling children what to do: Boys and
girls, after you read this, I want you to compose a
summary. We do that pretty routinely. We’re somewhat
inconsistent about the how of it. Though research tells
us that the more explicit we are about procedures, the
more likely children will acquire and use the strategy on
their own, and acquire and use it successfully. And we’re
also not very consistent about the when and why of it.
And the when and why is really important. It’s part of the
engagement; it’s part of the motivation; it’s part of the
understanding that leads children to say, This isn’t just
something that I do inside school doors. This isn’t just a
classroom thing. This is something that has a purpose
as I make my way through my daily routines. So, these
are the key ideas to think about as we plan instruction.
And finally, let’s think about the purposes of our
comprehension and response tasks. We should use
comprehension to engage children in esthetic response.
An esthetic response to text is a response that engages
children in essentially an emotional and affective
response to the text: Wow, I really liked this. Wow, this
reminded me of…. Wow this made me think about…. An
esthetic response asks children to respond personally in
some way to that text.
An efferent response is essentially an information-based
response, and has ties in some way, very often, to
curricular goals: I want you to read this to compose a
summary. I want you to read this and compare and
contrast it with…. It’s an information-based response,
very often teacher directed. The context for response is,
Do I want children to respond to this collaboratively, or
individually? Both of those responses are important in
building a community of learners, and in building
children who are successful comprehenders. And types
of response are, Do I want children to respond to this
today in writing, or do I want them to have an oral
discussion about it? And both of those are important.
In the chapter you read for today, by Nell Duke and
David Pearson, they began the chapter by saying, In
some ways comprehension is very much like decoding.
In particular, when we talk about an effective decoding
program, we talk about balance. When we talk about an
effective comprehension program, we must also talk
about balance. So it’s balance in the purposes, the
contexts, and the types of response that’s important in
the comprehension program. And it’s the inclusion of
these characteristics that’s important in the method of
instruction.
